
Here the Lord informs Arjuna that this system of yoga, the Bhagavad-gétä,
was first spoken to the sun-god, and the sun-god explained it to Manu, and
Manu explained it to Ikñväku, and in that way, by disciplic succession, one
speaker after another, this yoga system has been coming down. But in the
course of time it has become lost. Consequently the Lord has to speak it again,
this time to Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra.
He tells Arjuna that He is relating this supreme secret to him because he is His
devotee and His friend. The purport of this is that Bhagavad-gétä is a treatise
which is especially meant for the devotee of the Lord. There are three classes
of transcendentalists, namely the jïäné, the yogé and the bhakta, or the
impersonalist, the meditator and the devotee. Here the Lord clearly tells
Arjuna that He is making him the first receiver of a new paramparä (disciplic
succession) because the old succession was broken. It was the Lord’s wish,
therefore, to establish another paramparä in the same line of thought that was
coming down from the sun-god to others, and it was His wish that His teaching
be distributed anew by Arjuna. He wanted Arjuna to become the authority in
understanding the Bhagavad-gétä. So we see that Bhagavad-gétä is instructed to
Arjuna especially because Arjuna was a devotee of the Lord, a direct student
of Kåñëa, and His intimate friend. Therefore Bhagavad-gétä is best understood
by a person who has qualities similar to Arjuna’s. That is to say he must be a
devotee in a direct relationship with the Lord. As soon as one becomes a
devotee of the Lord, he also has a direct relationship with the Lord. That is a
very elaborate subject matter, but briefly it can be stated that a devotee is in a
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in one of five different
ways:
1. One may be a devotee in a passive state;
2. One may be a devotee in an active state;
3. One may be a devotee as a friend;
4. One may be a devotee as a parent;
5. One may be a devotee as a conjugal lover.